
Section [x]: MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District
A.	Purpose
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi- family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the following purposes:
1. [Add one or more purposes.]





















B.	Establishment and Applicability
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately _____ acres in size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district (s) and is shown on the Zoning Map.
1. Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing   located   within a MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of this Section [x].
2. Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning [Bylaw/Ordinance] governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in Section [x] are governed by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
3. [Sub-districts. The MCMOD contains the following sub-districts, all of which are shown on the MCMOD Boundary Map: [Name of one or more sub-districts].
















C.	Definitions.
For purposes of this Section[x], the following definitions shall apply.
1. Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a specified income, or both.
2. Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Section [x].
3. Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site Plan Review, or Special Permit.
4. Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical region that includes the [City] [Town] of _______, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
5. As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary zoning approval.
6. Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the  footprint of the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage does not include surface parking.
7. Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time.
8. DHCD. The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, or any successor agency.
9. Development standards. Provisions of Section [x] G. General Development Standards made applicable to projects within the MCMOD.
10. EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities, DHCD’s successor agency.
11. Lot. An area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site of a building or buildings.
12. MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.
13. Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non- residential uses, including, commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses.
14. Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building.
15. Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.
16. Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land within a parcel boundary.
17. Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple stories; a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a vehicle parking area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a parking surface at least eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include surface parking or carports, including solar carports.
18. Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure for the purposes of this definition.
19. Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking. and sanitation.
20. Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act.
21. Site plan review authority. [Identify the municipal board, council, or committee responsible for Site plan review.]
22. Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include the [board of selectmen / select board], city council, board of appeals, planning board, or zoning administrators as designated by the Zoning for the issuance of special permits.
23. Sub-district. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the MCMOD district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, or development standards.
24. Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units maintained by EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate- income housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law.
25. Transit station. An MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, or ferry terminal.
a. Commuter rail station. Any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather than intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service.
b. Ferry terminal. The location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, year-round MBTA ferry service.
c. c. Subway station. Any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange   Line, or Blue Line.








D.	Permitted Uses
1. Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the MCMOD.
a. Multi-family housing.
Ground FloorCommunity space.Educational uses.Personal services.RetailExperiential retail, including retail associated with dance or exercise studios, music studios, photography studios, or other combination of education, services, and retail.Restaurant, café, and other eating establishments without a drive-through.Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-working spaceArtists’ studios, maker space, and small-scale food production [no more than 5,000 SF], and retail associated with each use.Any FloorResidential (required component).b. Mixed-use development. As of right uses in a mixed-use development are as follows:

2.  [Uses Permitted by Special Permit. The following uses [and accessory uses] require a Special Permit from the [Special Permit Granting Authority].]
3. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the permitted uses in Section D.1.
a. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an above ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot as the principal use.
b. [Identify as of right accessory uses appropriate to the above permitted uses.]






E.	Dimensional Standards
1. Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows:

StandardLot SizeMinimum(1) (SF)Height(2)Stories (Maximum)Feet (Maximum)Minimum Open Space(3)
2. [Additional standards – see notes]

StandardFloor Area Ratio (FAR)(4)Maximum Building Coverage(5)
3. [Additional standards – see notes]

StandardMinimum Frontage(6) (ft)Front Yard Setback(7)Min. to Max. (ft.)Side Yard SetbackCorner (ft)Interior (ft)Rear Yard SetbackMin. to Max. (ft.)
4. Multi-Building Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal building.8
5. Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which features are in no way used for living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of the ground floor area of the building.
6. Exceptions: Renewable Energy Installations. The Site Plan Review Authority or Special Permit Granting Authority may waive the height and setbacks in Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards to accommodate the installation of solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, living, and other eco-roofs, energy storage, and air-source heat pump equipment. Such installations shall not create a significant detriment to abutters in terms of noise or shadow and must be appropriately integrated into the architecture of the building and the layout of the site. The installations shall not provide additional habitable space within the development.



















F.	Off-Street Parking
These parking requirements are applicable to development in the MCMOD.
1. Number of parking spaces. The following maximum numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other structures:
UseMaximum SpacesMulti-family[# spaces per Residential Dwelling Unit]Mixed-Use (Non-residential)/ Commercial[Sum of uses computed separately. (See 3, below.)]
2. Number of bicycle parking spaces. The following minimum numbers of covered bicycle storage spaces shall be provided by use:
UseMaximum SpacesMulti-family[# spaces per Residential Dwelling Unit]Mixed-Use (Non-residential)/ Commercial[# spaces per Gross Square Feet or other measure]
3. [Bicycle storage. For a multi-family development of [25] units or more, or a mixed- use development of [25,000] square feet or more, covered parking bicycle parking spaces shall be integrated into the structure of the building(s).]
4. [Shared Parking within a Mixed-Use Development. Parking requirements for a mix of uses on a single site may be adjusted through the Site Plan Review process, if the applicant can demonstrate that shared spaces will meet parking demands by using accepted methodologies.]








G.	[General Development Standards
1. Development standards in the MCMOD are applicable to all multi-family development with more than [25] units or mixed-use development of more than [25,000] SF within the MCMOD. These standards are components of the Site Plan Review process in Section [x] I. Site Plan Review.
2. Site Design.
a. Connections. Sidewalks shall provide a direct connections among building entrances, the public sidewalk (if applicable), bicycle storage, and parking.
b. Vehicular access. Where feasible, curb cuts shall be minimized, and shared driveways encouraged.
c. Open Space.
d. Screening for Parking. Surface parking adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be screened by a landscaped buffer of sufficient width to allow the healthy establishment of trees, shrubs, and perennials, but no less than [6 (six)] feet. The buffer may include a fence or wall of no more than three feet in height unless there is a significant grade change between the parking and the sidewalk.
e. Parking Materials. The parking surface may be concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, bricks, or pavers, including pervious materials but not including grass or soil not contained within a paver or other structure.
f. Plantings. Plantings shall include species that are native or adapted to the region. Plants on the Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List, as may be amended, shall be prohibited.
g. Lighting. Light levels shall meet or exceed the minimum design guidelines defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and shall provide illumination necessary for safety and convenience while preventing glare and overspill onto adjoining properties and reducing the amount of skyglow.
h. Mechanicals. Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be screened by a combination of fencing and plantings. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened if visible from a public right-of-way.
i. Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be screened by a combination of fencing and plantings. Where possible, dumpsters or other trash and recycling collection points shall be located within the building.
j. Stormwater management. Strategies that demonstrate compliance of the construction activities and the proposed project with the most current versions of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Standards, the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, Massachusetts Erosion Sediment and Control Guidelines, and, if applicable, additional requirements under the [Municipality] MS4 Permit for projects that disturb more than one acre and discharge to the [City’s/Town’s] municipal stormwater system, and an Operations and Management Plan for both the construction activities and ongoing post-construction maintenance and reporting requirements.
3.  Buildings: General.
a. Position relative to principal street. The primary building shall have its principal façade and entrance facing the principal street. See also Section G.7. Buildings: Corner Lots.
b. Entries. Where feasible, entries shall be clearly defined and linked to a paved pedestrian network that includes the public sidewalk.
4. Buildings: Multiple buildings on a lot.
a. For a mixed-use development, uses may be mixed within the buildings or in separate buildings.
b. Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the amount of impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall be connected to minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of-way.
c. A paved pedestrian network shall connect parking to the entries to all buildings and the buildings to each other.
d. The orientation of multiple buildings on a lot should reinforce the relationships among the buildings. All building façade(s) shall be treated with the same care and attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials.
e. The building(s) adjacent to the public street shall have a pedestrian entry facing the public street.
5. Buildings: Mixed-use development.
a. In a mixed-use building, access to and egress from the residential component shall be clearly differentiated from access to other uses. Such differentiation may occur by using separate entrances or egresses from the building or within a lobby space shared among different uses.
b. Paved pedestrian access from the residential component shall be provided to residential parking and amenities and to the public sidewalk, as applicable.
c. Materials for non-residential uses shall be stored inside or under cover and shall not be accessible to residents of the development.
d. Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the amount of impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall be connected to minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of-way.

6. Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing and mixed-use development shall have common outdoor space that all residents can access. Such space may be located in any combination of ground floor, courtyard, rooftop, or terrace. All outdoor space shall count towards the project’s minimum Open Space requirement.
7. Buildings: Corner Lots. A building on a corner lot shall indicate a primary entrance either along one of the street-facing façades or on the primary corner as an entrance serving both streets.
a. Such entries shall be connected by a paved surface to the public sidewalk, if applicable.
b. All façades visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with similar care and attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials.
c. Fire exits serving more than one story shall not be located on either of the street-facing façades.
8. Buildings: Infill Lots. If the adjacent buildings are set back at a distance that exceeds the minimum front yard requirements, infill buildings shall meet the requirements of Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards. Otherwise, infill buildings may match the setback line of either adjacent building, or an average of the setback of the two buildings to provide consistency along the street.
9. Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design and location to the principal building façade.
a. Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building. Parking shall not be located in the setback between the building and any lot line adjacent to the public right-of-way.
b. Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building shall be more prominent in design and placement than the vehicular entry into the garage.
c. Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on the same lot as one or more multi-family buildings or mixed-use development shall be subordinate in design and placement to the multi-family or mixed-use building(s) on the lot.
10. Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject to compliance with the Compliance Guidelines, the Site Plan Review Authority may waive the requirements of this Section [x] G. General Development Standards, in the interests of design flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the MCMOD.]






H.	[Affordability Requirements.
1. Purpose.
a. [Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by encouraging a diversity of housing opportunities for people of different income levels;
b. Provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all incomes, ages, and sizes;
c. Increase the production of affordable housing units to meet existing and anticipated housing needs; and
d. Work to overcome economic segregation allowing [Municipality] to be a community of opportunity in which low and moderate-income households have the opportunity to advance economically.]
2. Applicability. This requirement is applicable to all residential and mixed-use developments with [ten (10)] or more dwelling units, whether new construction, substantial rehabilitation, expansion, reconstruction, or residential conversion (Applicable Projects). No project may be divided or phased to avoid the requirements of this section.
3. Affordability requirements. [Either a or b, not both.]
a. [Subsidized Housing Inventory. [All] units affordable to households earning 80% or less of AMI created in the MCMOD under this section must be eligible for listing on EOHLC’s Subsidized Housing Inventory.]
b. [Non-SHI Affordable Units. Affordable Units do not have to qualify for listing on EOHLC’s Subsidized Housing Inventory but must be restricted in accordance with the metrics below.]
4. Provision of Affordable Housing. In Applicable Projects, not fewer than [ten percent (10%)] of housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing Units. For purposes of calculating the number of units of Affordable Housing required within a development project, a fractional unit shall be rounded down to the next whole number. The Affordable Units shall be available to households earning income up to [eighty percent (80%)] of the AMI.
5. [Fee in Lieu.
a. As an alternative to the requirements of paragraph (3) of this section, and at the sole discretion and majority vote of [the Executive Body of the municipality] upon a recommendation of the [Zoning Enforcement Officer/Planning Director/Building Inspector/Housing Coordinator], the developer or property owner shall contribute a fee to the Municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in lieu of providing all or a portion of the required Affordable Housing Units within the proposed development.
b. The fee in lieu of providing one or more Affordable Housing Units shall be a minimum of [$400,000.00] per required Affordable Housing Units not provided within the development. This fee may be adjusted upward by a majority vote of [the Executive Body of the municipality].]
c. Any payment to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund as an in lieu contribution for Affordable Housing Units shall be made as follows: at least 50 percent of the total owed prior to the issuance of a building permit; and the remaining total owed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
6. Development Standards. Affordable Units shall be:
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, appearance, construction, and quality of exterior and interior materials with the other units and/or lots;
b. Dispersed throughout the development;
c. Located such that the units have equal access to shared amenities, including light and air, and utilities (including any bicycle storage and/or Electric Vehicle charging stations) within the development;
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of any potential nuisances as [market-rate units] within the development;
e.  Distributed proportionately among unit sizes; and
f.  Distributed proportionately across each phase of a phased development.
g. [Occupancy permits may be issued for market-rate units prior to the end of construction of the entire development provided that occupancy permits for Affordable Units are issued simultaneously on a pro rata basis.]
7. Administration.
a. The [Zoning Enforcement Officer/Planning Director/Building Inspector/Housing Coordinator] shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the requirements in this section.]













I. [Site Plan Review
1. Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for a project that proposes [25] dwelling units or more. An application for Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the Permitting Authority for consistency with the purpose and intent of Sections [x] D through [x] H.
2. Submission Requirements. As part of any application for Site Plan Review for a project within the MCMOD submitted under Sections [x] E through [x] I (or, for projects not requiring Site Plan Review, prior to submission of any application for a building permit), the Applicant must submit the following documents to the Municipality:
a. Application and fee for Site Plan Review.
b. Site plans that show the position of the building on the site, points of vehicular access to and from the site and vehicular circulation on the site, stormwater management, utilities, and landscape treatments, including any screening of adjacent properties, and other information commonly required by Municipality for Site Plan Review.
c. Elevations of the building(s) showing the architectural design of the building.
d. All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of [one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or larger], or at a scale as approved in advance by the Permitting Authority.
e. Narrative of compliance with the applicable design standards of this Section[x].
3. Timeline. Site Plan Review should be commenced no later than 30 days of the submission of a complete application and should be completed expeditiously. The site plan review authority may, when appropriate, seek the input of other municipal boards or officials. In general, site plan review should be completed no more than 6 months after the submission of the application.
4. Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section [x] D Permitted Uses shall be granted upon determination by the Site Plan Review Authority that the following conditions have been satisfied. The Site Plan Review Authority may impose reasonable conditions, at the expense of the applicant, to ensure that these conditions have been satisfied.
a. The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in Municipality’s requirements for a Building Permit and Site Plan Review; and
b. [Use only if there are no development standards within the local zoning or included in this MCMOD district.] Any new building construction or other site alteration shall provide adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage that demonstrates compliance of the construction activities and the proposed project with the most current versions of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Standards, the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, Massachusetts Erosion Sediment and Control Guidelines, and, if applicable, additional requirements under the [Municipality] MS4 Permit for projects that disturb more than one acre and discharge to the [City’s/Town’s] municipal stormwater system, and an Operations and Management Plan for both the construction activities and ongoing post-construction maintenance and reporting requirements.
      OR
c. [Use if the municipality used Section G., above] the project as described in the application meets the development standards set forth in Section [x] G. General Development Standards.]
5. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a project be developed in phases subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review Authority, provided that the submission shows the full buildout of the project and all associated impacts as of the completion of the final phase. However, no project may be phased solely to avoid the provisions of Section [x] H. Affordability Requirements.]














J.	Severability.
If any provision of this Section [x] is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of Section [x] shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any provision of this Section [x] shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the [Municipality’s] Zoning.
























Appendix A: Sub-districts

The use of sub-districts within a larger overlay or base zoning district may be appropriate for some MBTA Communities. Sub-districts may appear complicated, but they provide the opportunity to address more specific local conditions within a community, especially those whose development patterns shift significantly throughout the built environment. For example, a community may wish to create a single MCMOD that includes one level of development intensity next to a transit station, a second level in the downtown area, and a third level on a large parcel that is likely to be redeveloped for multi-family housing. Three sub-districts would allow that community to address area-specific goals within a single overlay dedicated to multi- family use.
The requirements for sub-districts may vary by purpose, use, dimensional standards, and development standards. If a community is considering creating sub-districts with this Sample Zoning, the following sections may need to be modified.
* Section [x] A. Purpose. Information about the purpose of each sub-district, if the MCMOD has more than one district, may also be added.
* Section [x] B. Applicability. Add a description of each sub-district. Consider describing each district by the building typologies allowed in that district or the dimensional standard that changes the most in each district.
* Section [x] C. Definitions. Add any definitions specific to the sub-district(s).
* Section [x] D. Permitted Uses. The community can define uses permitted as of right for each sub-district. The community may consider basing some of these on housing typologies. In the example above, the area next to the transit station could include mid- rise multi-family of three to five stories, the downtown area could include three-to-eight family-buildings tucked behind the main street, and the large parcel could include clusters of town houses with protected open space.
* Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards may be used to define specific sub-districts. See Appendix C. Development Intensity for a broader discussion.
* Section [x] F. Parking Standards. Requirements for parking (and other components, such as bicycle spaces, storage, and EV stations) may also vary by sub-district. Considerations include distance from transit and density of other uses, among others. Sub-districts with a higher mix of uses that provide jobs, goods, and services within walking or biking distance of housing may need lower parking requirements.
* Section [x] G. General Development Standards. Sub-districts within the MCMOD may have separate development standards which can be added to Section [x] G. General Development Standards. The community can define a consistent design approach for buildings and sites in each sub-district. Note that development standards should be limited to those that fall under the criteria for Site Plan Review. See Appendix F. Development Standards and Design Guidelines for additional discussion of this topic.


Appendix B. Affordable Housing
Section 3A and Affordable Housing

Section 3A does not address affordable housing. Section 4.b. of the Compliance Guidelines addresses affordable housing as noted in the comments for Section [x] H. Affordability Requirements. Municipalities have an option to include deeper affordability requirements with EOHLC approval of an Economic Feasibility Analysis (EFA). Guidance related to submission of an EFA can be found on the mass.gov/mbtacommunities web pages.
A community may impose affordability restrictions as permitted by the Compliance Guidelines without such restrictions being inconsistent with the as of right multi-family use required by Section 3A. The community’s requirements also need not be tied to the use of the Site Plan Review process. (See Appendix G. Site Plan Review.)
Affordability requirements can be tied to the as of right use or as part of a special permit process with development incentives – an option for a special permit is discussed in Appendix D. Special Permits. Affordability under the Compliance Guidelines is restricted; the use of special permits may provide greater flexibility for specific local initiatives for affordable housing above the requirements allowed by the Compliance Guidelines.
Workforce Housing: Affordability Requirements for units ver 80% of AMI
Communities may choose to work towards including their units on the Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI) which must be restricted to be affordable to households making not more than 80% of the AMI and meet other SHI eligibility requirements. However, some communities are addressing local needs for Workforce Housing that has affordability requirements for households making over 80% of AMI – typically between 81% and 120% of AMI. Affordable units that are restricted to households in that income range will not qualify for the SHI because of the higher income levels. Such affordable workforce units must have recorded deed restrictions and must be monitored for compliance with income restrictions.
MassHousing provides information about their Workforce Housing Fund and the program guidelines here: https://www.masshousing.com/developers/workforce-housing
Subsidized Housing Inventory
In Section [x] H. Affordability Requirements, optional language in the Sample Zoning ties the creation of Affordable Units to the SHI. For units to count on the SHI, they must comply with all applicable requirements under 760 CMR 56.00 et seq., including without limitation (a) income limitations no higher than 80% AMI, (b) receipt of a state subsidy, which may take the form of technical assistance under EOHLC’s Local Initiative Program/Local Action Unit Program, and (c) recordation of an affordability restriction with the records of the Registry of Deeds.

Note that any development standards for SHI units must comply with the requirements of an eligible subsidy program. (This may apply to both Section [x] H. Affordability Requirements and Section [x] G. General Development Standards.)
SHI eligible units may be subject to a recorded regulatory agreement with the relevant subsidizing agency. In the case of Local Action Units created through EOHLC’s LIP program, such regulatory agreement shall be executed by the developer/project sponsor, the municipality, and EOHLC in accordance with Local Initiative Program regulations and guidelines.
Communities using the Local Initiative Program/Local Action Unit Program should coordinate with EOHLC early in development process to ensure compliance with program and development requirements (e.g., unit size, number of bedrooms required, or long-term use restriction/ regulatory agreement to be executed with EOHLC).
Resources
For detailed information about SHI eligibility and a list of Eligible Subsidy Programs, please review EOHLC’s G.L. c. 40B Guidelines:
https://www.mass.gov/doc/guidelines-gl-c40b-comprehensive-permit-projects-subsidized-housing-inventory/download

For more information about the LAU Program, visit the LIP/LAU Program website:
https://www.mass.gov/service-details/local-initiative-program

Other resources to review include MHP’s Local Action Units Guidelines:
https://www.housingtoolbox.org/resources/local-action-units-laus-guide

and EOHLC’s 40R program if the community does not already have a 40R district.
https://www.mass.gov/service-details/chapter-40r


Appendix C. Development Intensity

Development intensity refers to the relative intensity of the built environment with respect to the location from a transit station. The measurement of distance from a transit station is based on the distance from the closest edge of the parcel containing the transit station to the parcel being measured. Communities can use the area types described below as guides to define either a MCMOD based on the current development patterns in their community or sub-districts within their proposed MCMOD. Please note – these are only suggestions for a variety of approaches that may be taken to comply with Section 3A. Many communities will craft their own scale of development intensity or even multiple sub-districts in order to demonstrate compliance.
* Lower Intensity. Larger lot sizes, lower building heights, higher requirements for minimum Open Space, and higher maximum parking ratios. Lower Intensity areas are more likely to be beyond a ½-mile from a transit station.
* Medium Intensity. Mid-height buildings, medium requirements for minimum Open Space, medium maximum parking ratios. Lot sizes may vary depending on the location within the community. Medium intensity areas may be transitions from Medium-High Intensity areas to Lower Intensity areas within a ½-mile to a mile of a transit station. Medium Intensity areas could also be community-defined town or village centers.
* Medium-High Intensity. Transition from High Intensity to Medium Intensity areas in terms of height and open space requirements and generally within a ½-mile of a transit station or within larger community-defined town centers or downtowns.
* High Intensity. Smaller lots and taller buildings or block-size buildings, no requirements for minimum Open Space, lower maximum parking ratios or structured parking. High intensity areas are more likely to be located within a ¼-mile of a Transit Station.

Dimensional Standards and Development Intensity
These sample dimensional standards are split into a menu of four different area types based on the relative intensity of development. These suggested dimensional standards can be set by Multi-family Building Type, sub-district, or throughout the MCMOD. The area could be an entire district, for example, an Adjacent Community may have a development pattern that is lower in intensity of use and built environment than the community next door with a commuter rail station. That Adjacent Community may wish to use the suggested Lower Intensity dimensions below.
However, the Adjacent Community may have a town center with a more intense development pattern and decide that its MCMOD should have two sub-districts. The first sub-district may apply the Medium Intensity or Medium-High Intensity standards below to the town center and the Medium Intensity or Lower Intensity standards to the second sub-district within the same MCMOD (See Appendix A. Sub-districts for more discussion on this topic).

The minimum lot sizes in the table below for the Lower Intensity and Medium Intensity areas assume a single building per lot. See Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards for the notes that match the organization of these tables and the superscripted numbers below. The purpose of these tables is to show how the different dimensional types can work together to produce the four development intensity examples.
For communities wishing to test their existing zoning or a proposed zoning district with the Compliance Model, the dimensional standards below provide a starting point for that assessment. These tables may be particularly useful if the first iteration with the Compliance Model indicates a potential problem with compliance.
      1. Lot Sizes, Height, and Open Space.



Standard Lower IntensityMedium IntensityMedium- High Intensity  High IntensityLot SizeMinimum(1) (SF)20,0005,0002,5000Height(2)Stories (Maximum)3456Feet (Maximum)45556575Minimum Open Space(3)Within ¼ mile of a Transit Station20%10%10%5%Within ½ mile of a Transit Station20%10%10%5%Over ½ mile from a Transit Station30%20%10%5%
6. FAR and Building Coverage.



StandardLower IntensityMedium IntensityMedium- High IntensityHigh IntensityFloor Area Ratio (FAR)(4)2.53.54.55 or higherMaximum Building Coverage(5)Within ¼ mile of a Transit Station80%90%90%95%Within ½ mile of a Transit Station80%90%90%95%Over ½ mile from a Transit Station70%80%90%95%
7. Frontage and Yards.



StandardLower IntensityMedium IntensityMedium- High IntensityHigh IntensityMinimum Frontage(6) (ft)5025250Front Yard Setback(7)Min. to Max. (ft.)10-4010-200-200-15Side Yard SetbackCorner (ft)10-4010-200-100-10Interior (ft)10-4010-200-100-10Rear Yard SetbackMin. to Max. (ft.)10-4010-205-105-10

Appendix D. Special Permits

Multi-family must be allowed as of right and may be subject to Site Plan review. However, a community may choose to add other uses, either as of right or with a special permit. The use of the special permit approval process in the MCMOD will depend on the following:
* Other uses that are permitted in the underlying zoning.
* Specific types of multi-family as long as the multi-family that is allowed as of right is sufficient to be compliance with Section 3A. For example, the community may require a special permit process to allow a density or height bonus in exchange for additional affordable units above the level set in the Compliance Guidelines. (see example Section[x].D.2.a, below) However, failure to obtain the special permit would not eliminate the ability to develop multi-family under as of right zoning.
* Uses that are compatible in nature but not by location. For example, office use in a mixed- use building may be allowed by right, but a special permit is required for office use on the second floor. (See sample Section[x].D.2.b, below) Note that residential use is a required component of mixed-use development in the MCMOD.
* Any uses that the community considers to be compatible with multi-family zoning in this particular area or sub-district but may require additional review. For example, a light industrial use may be combined with a multi-family use, but the community requires a special permit for the industrial use to set appropriate requirements for pedestrian and vehicular circulation and the mitigation of potentially noxious impacts such as noise, light, odor, or storage. The accompanying multi-family is allowed as of right; site plan review can be used to check that site and building components are compatible with the special permit conditions for the industrial use. However, the special permit for the industrial use cannot be denied in an attempt to prevent the muti-family use; the two uses are separate components of the development. (See sample Section[x].D.2.c, below)
* Standards that the community wants to promote, such as the use or generation of renewable energy, mitigation of heat island effect, or other specific community benefits. Such standards could be paired with a height or density bonus. (See sample Section[x].D.2.d, below)
* Whether the community is using this zoning as a base district rather than as an overlay and wishes to permit additional use types with more stringent standards.
* Whether the community is using sub-districts with different levels of development intensity.
Remember to add the definitions of additional uses to Section [x] C. Definitions if those uses are not already defined in the community’s current Zoning.
Section[x].D.2.a-d below are provided as examples for communities to consider and are not required by the Compliance Guidelines. Communities have many options to define uses that

require special permits, but the options below address some situations that may be common to the MBTA Communities. The sample language below is provided as a guide to developing community-appropriate special permit uses.

D. Permitted Uses.
1. Uses Permitted by Special Permit. The following uses require a Special Permit from the Permitting Authority.
a. Affordable Housing. The provision of Affordable Housing for either (a) at least [25%] of the total units in a proposed multi-family housing or mixed-use development which are affordable to households making no more than [80%] of the Area Median Income or (b) at least [10%] of the total units in the proposed multi-family housing or mixed-use development which are affordable to households making no more than [50%] of the Area Median Income. In exchange for either (a) or (b), the proposed multi-family housing or mixed-use development shall have one additional story of height above the requirements set forth in Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards. All other provisions of Section [x] H. Affordability Requirements apply to the Affordable Housing Units developed in accordance with this section.
  Why Might a Community Add This Special Permit?
Some communities seek higher requirements for the provision of affordable housing units than the Compliance Guidelines allow. (See Appendix B. Affordable Housing for more discussion of this topic.) Higher affordability requirements help to address community needs, but for smaller projects, the provision of such units may increase the cost of development beyond the level of feasibility. One way to address this situation is to provide a bonus that adds additional value to the development to support the higher requirement for affordable units. In this example, an extra story of height acts as that incentive.
b. Second-floor Office Use in Mixed-Use Developments. Office use on the second floor of a mixed-use development.
  Why Might a Community Add This Special Permit?
Residential is a required component of mixed-use developments in a MCMOD. As suggested in Section [x] D. Permitted Uses, the non-residential uses would be limited to the ground floor. However, certain situations may call for a non-residential use on an upper floor – for example, the adaptive reuse of an older building or a site with significant topographical change. A Special Permit could provide flexibility in the location of non-residential uses within the building (in this example, office). The key is that denial of the special permit for this purpose may not be used to deny the residential component of the project.

c. Light Industrial Use in Mixed-Use Developments. The [Permitting Authority] may grant a special permit for light industrial use in combination with multi- family housing or mixed-use development. The special permit shall be limited to conditions on the integration of the circulation of pedestrians and vehicles with the circulation for other uses on the site, location of industrial loading docks with respect to residential uses, and the mitigation of noise, dust, odors, and storage of hazardous and/or bulk materials, including trash and waste products, related to the operations of the industrial use. The [Site Plan Review Authority] may require appropriate internal landscaped buffers between uses to promote safety and mitigate visual or auditory impacts. Denial of a special permit for industrial use is not an automatic denial of the multi-family housing or residential components of a mixed-use development.
  Why Might a Community Add This Special Permit?
In some communities, industrial land is under pressure from residential development, which may have a higher market value. Those communities do not want to lose the ability to keep the land available for industrial use when the market shifts. In other communities, land value for industrial uses is insufficient to spur investment in those uses. Residential as a component of light industrial may help preserve a portion of the land for industrial use, support existing industrial uses with a higher-value land use, and locate housing near jobs. The key to this example is to define light industrial to be consistent with residential uses on the same site. Light industrial uses will have circulation requirements for loading and unloading and uses that may be considered noxious by residents, including outdoor storage, longer hours of operation, odors from processing and manufacturing, and other impacts. Again, the key is to create development standards that mitigate the negative impacts and provide safe circulation for pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers.
As with the example above, denial of the special permit cannot be used solely as a means of denying the residential use. For this to be successful, interested communities should carefully define the purpose of such co-location of uses to support both light industrial and residential and not use one to supplant the other.

d. Stormwater Management and Heat Island Impact. The Permitting Authority may grant a special permit to allow one additional story of height above the requirements set forth in Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards in exchange for retaining 100% of the stormwater on site and for including one of the following additional components:
i. Install a vegetated or green roof over 50% of the roof area.
ii. Use diffuse, highly reflective materials on 75% of the roof area.
iii. Provide solar PV and/or solar thermal on a minimum of 50 percent of the roof area.
iv. Provide 100% highly reflective concrete topping.
v. Install a blue roof over 50% of the roof area to provide initial temporary water storage and then gradual release of stored water.
  Why Might a Community Add This Special Permit?
This example is one of several throughout this document that encourages communities to consider addressing other local needs through the MCMOD, with a reminder that the resulting zoning must still comply with Section 3A and the Compliance Guidelines. In this example, a height bonus is provided to encourage strategies that will help mitigate the negative impacts from an increase in precipitation (number and intensity of events) and the heat island effect. The example bonus is not limited to a single story of height; communities may mix and match the suggestions above to meet their local need. For example, the first story could be for retaining 100% of stormwater or site and an additional story could be offered for each of the accompanying criteria. The list above addresses a more urbanized environment; a different list might be more suitable for a lower intensity district.


Appendix E. Parking Considerations

Parking requirements are a factor in how much land is available for development and the required spaces per residential dwelling unit is part of the calculations in the Compliance Model (See commentary for Section [x] E. Dimensional Standards. The need for parking for residential use is partly a function of the distance between the housing and jobs, goods, and services. The presence of public transit helps reduce that need by providing an alternative method of access. However, in some markets, the demand for parking is higher: housing may be further away from other uses, public transit is not available, or the location of other needs, particularly jobs, is not in alignment with the available transit.

Parking Maximums
This Sample Zoning suggests establishing a parking maximum, rather than a minimum. Most communities have parking minimums; this may encourage some developers to over-park the site. Over time, parking maximums may reduce the amount of land devoted to parking, thus freeing up more land for housing and open space. As with other guidance in this document, communities should evaluate what is appropriate for their community. For example, lots in Lower Intensity areas outside walking or biking distance to transit stations may need a higher parking ratio for surface lots; smaller lots in High Intensity areas may either not need parking or may have structured parking as an option. (See Appendix C. Development Intensity for a discussion of these area types.)
The suggested ratios in the table below are maximums based on the distance of the use from a Transit Station and are provided as a starting point. Communities using the Compliance Model to test the other zoning parameters in Appendix C. Development Intensity may also want to test the ratios below as parking is one of the factors in the Compliance Model.
1. Number of parking spaces. The following maximum numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other structures:


Use/LocationMaximum Spaces per Residential Dwelling UnitMulti-familyWithin ¼ mile of a Transit Station1.00Within ½ mile of a Transit Station1.25Over ½ mile from a Transit Station2.00Mixed-use, non-residentialSum of uses computed separately. (See 3, below.)
Bicycle Parking and Storage
As bicycle use becomes more common as a form of both regular transit and recreation, providing bicycle spaces in each development is increasing in importance. Equally important for multi- family housing is the ability to store bicycles in covered storage. The table below is a starting point for the minimum number of bicycle spaces per use, by geography. Bicycle parking and storage is not part of the Compliance Model and is not a required component of compliance with Section 3A and the Compliance Guidelines. Communities should consider the existing and projected local bicycle infrastructure when establishing their regulations. For example, a community with a multi-use rail trail may want to establish higher minimum requirements for spaces and storage.
2. Number of bicycle parking spaces. The following minimum numbers of covered bicycle storage spaces shall be provided by use:



Location

Multi-family   Mixed-Use (Non-residential)/
CommercialWithin 1 mile of a Transit Station1 per dwelling unit1 per every [five (5)] parking spacesOver 2 miles from a Transit Station1 per every [two (2)] dwelling units1 per every [ten (10)] parking spaces
Parking Relief for Historic Buildings
Another option for meeting local needs is to consider incentives for the adaptive reuse of historic buildings. One way to do that is to provide parking relief. For example, removing parking requirements for the residential uses in an historic building creates an incentive to reuse the upper floors for residential uses. This is important, because the requirements to bring older buildings up to code for upper-story residential use can be expensive. Reductions in parking requirements help offset that cost and reduce the need for a variance for a smaller downtown lot with an existing building. This option may be more important for a community retaining parking minimums in its Zoning. Sample language is below:
Waiver of Parking Requirements for Historic Buildings. The adaptive reuse of buildings listed on the National or State Registers of Historic Places, or eligible for such listing, is not required to provide parking for the residential uses within the historic building. Parking shall be provided for additions to the historic building or for

new additional buildings on the same lot in accordance with the requirements of this section.

Electric Vehicles
Communities may consider requiring EV charging stations or the infrastructure for later addition of such charging stations as recognition of increasing demand for electric vehicles. Communities who choose this option may not apply this solely to multi-family uses within the MCMOD or create such a high requirement that the multi-family use is rendered infeasible.
Sample language for requiring EV charging stations is below. This could be modified to require the underlying infrastructure instead:
Number of electric vehicle (EV) charging stations. For all uses within the MCMOD, electric charging stations are required with one EV space required for every [twenty (20)] parking spaces, rounded up to the next highest number of EV stations.


Appendix F. Development Standards and Design Guidelines 
Development Standards

Development Standards, examples of which are provided in Section [x] G. General Development Standards and Section [x] H. Affordability Requirements must be clear, objective, and quantifiable – in other words, anyone reading the standard must be able to say with certainty whether or not the standard has been met. An example might be a requirement for a roof pitch of 9:12 or a prohibition on parking in the front yard setback. Either can be verified by reviewing the plans from the Applicant either as part of a building permit application or in the Site Plan Review process.
Development standards in a MCMOD must be tied to either Administrative review for an as of right use or the criteria for Site Plan Review for projects for which that process is applicable. The development standards must reflect reasonable terms and conditions on the use.

Additional Options for Development Standards
The following sample Development Standards apply to specific development conditions that are less universal than the options provided in Section [x] G. General Development Standards are provided here as additional examples to consider.
* Open Space. Communities that may have larger lots with significant open space (perhaps as part of a multi-family cluster development), may consider development standards for the use of that open space. One option is as follows:
Open Space. Acceptable activities within the minimum required Open Space include natural areas (including wetlands and surface waters), wildlife and native plant habitat, landscape plantings, agricultural activities, low-impact design stormwater management, non-motorized trails, and other low-impact activities. Open Space shall not contain habitable structures.
* Location of Parking. Parking, either surface or structured, is not allowed between a building and the front yard lot line. On a corner lot, parking is not allowed between the building and the front and side yard lot lines.
* Multiple buildings on a lot/campus-style development. Buildings may be oriented around an internal street network or, in a campus-like environment, to create community courtyards serving to define space for public and private activities.

Design Guidelines
Some communities have a design guidelines document that is separate from its Zoning and contains text and illustrations of the standards to be followed. If communities wish to use such a document for their MCMODs, then care must be taken to limit the design guidelines to the criteria for Site Plan Review. Language that is subjective – for example, “materials must be of high quality” or “landscaping must be attractive” – is not appropriate for design guidelines in a MCMOD. The document must be readily available to the Applicant prior to submission for a building permit. Communities should also carefully consider how such design guidelines are incorporated into the Site Plan Review process; any use of the design guidelines should not cause an undue delay in the review of the application or be used to deny the as of right multi-family use. See Appendix G. Site Plan Review for more information.
Sample language to link to an outside document to the zoning is below:
Design Guidelines. The Sie Plan Review Authority may adopt and amend, by simple majority vote, Design Standards which shall be applicable to all rehabilitation, redevelopment, or new construction within the MCMOD. Such Design Guidelines must be objective and not subjective and may only address the scale and proportions of buildings, the alignment, width, and grade of streets and sidewalks, the type and location of infrastructure, the location of building and garage entrances, off street parking, the protection of significant natural site features, the location and design of on-site open spaces, exterior signs, and buffering in relation to adjacent properties. Design Guidelines may contain graphics illustrating a particular standard or definition in order to make such standard or definition clear and understandable.


Appendix G. Site Plan Review

For more specific information about the applicability of Site Plan Review to the MCMOD, please see section 4.a. of the Compliance Guidelines.
Communities should also review recent case law and opinions from the Attorney General’s Office (AGO). The AGO released an opinion for Case #10555 on November 21, 2022, that would be useful to review. This case revolved around a recent warrant article in the Town of Mansfield that established two levels of site plan review: Administrative Plan Approval and Major Plan Approval.
The opinion also provides specific guidance for communities who are considering applying Site Plan Review to uses covered under Section 3 of the Zoning Act (commonly referred to as Dover Amendment uses) and the as of right multi-family use under Section 3A.
Key components of Site Plan Review for MBTA Communities to consider as they modify Section
[x] I. Site Plan Review include the following:
* Site Plan Review is limited to the regulation of the use: the Permitting Authority may
“impose reasonable terms and conditions” on the as of right use.
* The Permitting Authority does not have “discretionary power” to deny the as of right use;
in other words, it may not prohibit the use.
Communities should review the opinion, which is available on the AGO’s Municipal Law Unit Decision Lookup: https://massago.hylandcloud.com/203publicaccess/mlu.htm. This opinion includes references to other case law relating to the use of the Site Plan Review process and how the courts have viewed procedures and criteria for review.
Resources for municipal staff and elected officials include the Handbook of Massachusetts Land Use and Planning Law (Mark Bobrowski, Wolters Kluwer, currently in the fifth edition) and, for members of the Massachusetts Chapter of the American Planning Association, the Guidebook to Massachusetts Land Use (Robert P. Mitchell, FAICP and Robert W. Ritchie, Esq., American Planning Association Massachusetts Chapter, 2021). Both have chapters on Site Plan Review, including applicable case law.



